Over 200 industry leaders and Data Science specialists gathered at the Aviva Stadium yesterday for the DatSci Awards 2016. After months of planning it was incredible to finally see the event come to life. Along with celebrating the Data Science industry, and of course our twenty-one finalists were recognised for their contributions to the field of Data Science and technology. Many of those celebrated are the emerging talent within the data science community, along with progressively thinking organisations and Data Scientists within Ireland. Paul Hayes, technology communications consultant and founder of Beachhut PR and our MC for the evening, put on his tinfoil hat for fear his mind was being hacked, and challenged the panel is “Skynet” really coming?  It created a great and exhilarating platform to discuss the future of Data Science, with a real community feel to it. @paul_ogrady  taking to the stage at  #DatSciAwards  to discuss the future of AI ????  pic.twitter.com/0LP1ehTb9v — Deirdre O’Brien (@d_indublin)  September 22, 2016 Edward McDonnell, director of CeADAR: “There is no better time than now to be a data scientists!”  #DatSciAwards   pic.twitter.com/PNu7bOSNH6 — Vincent Lonij (@Vincentropy)  September 22, 2016 Linda Davis, CEO of Next Generation, and Edward McDonnell Centre Director at CeADAR, opened the awards and promised that the day would be no ordinary occasion.  Everything about the day was like no other, starting off with Gin o Clock at 12.30 and a DJ set by We Are Red Head,  setting the platform for all to relax into the event and get talking about how they are all going to change and how our world will look in the future. We have finally arrived! The crowd is rolling in and enjoying the gin cocktail bar. Lots more on the way  #DatSciAwards   pic.twitter.com/QHWJm4qT5X — Next Generation (@NextGenRecruit)  September 22, 2016 Today is the day for handing out awards!  #DatSciAwards   pic.twitter.com/nVmMhhc2Ra — Mick Kerrigan (@mickkerrigan)  September 22, 2016 The day was full of interactive futuristic gadgets with a little 80’s weird science throw in.  Everything about the day was designed to create a stage for meeting and learning for everybody in the room.   The street food made this feel really on trend and served street cart style allowed everyone to mingle as we waited for our turn. Speaking about the running of the day Linda Davis said, “ Through the course of the day you will get to experience fantastic and exciting projects. Data Science is now impacting nearly every aspect of our lives and the cornerstone of these awards is about putting Ireland on the global map as a hub for innovation in cutting edge technology.” It’s said if u r the smartest person in the room, u r in the wrong room: definitely feel I’m in the right room this afo @  #DatSciAwards   pic.twitter.com/VTXtwH953A — Hugh Quigley (@HQwitter)  September 22, 2016 Co-founder of the DatSci Awards, Edward McDonnell, Director of CeADAR stated  “The CeADAR centre is delighted to be part of this great initiative in recognising and celebrating Ireland’s talent in the field of Data Science.  So many companies are centering their global analytics centres of excellence here because of this wealth of talent and expertise and this event celebrates this bright future for the industry.” You couldn’t help walking away with a feeling that a new data addiction is growing inside you All finalists gave short video intros into their projects and the winners announced throughout the event are as follows: Left to Right CarTrawler Start Up of the Year Award Winner – Barry Greene – Chief Technical Officer – Kinesis,Deutsche Bank Student of the Year Award  Winner – Kevin Brosnan – University of Limerick, Optum Data Scientist of the Year Award Winner – Dave Sheehan – Data Scientist, AIBDun & Bradstreet Academic Research Team of the Year Winner Oisin Boydell – CeADAR & Jing Su – CeADAR, Pegasus Indigenous Irish Company of the Year Award Winner  – Fergal Toomey – Chief Scientist at Corvil, Accenture Digital Multinational Company of the Year Award Winner – Abhishek Kumar Singh –Pramerica Data Scientist of the Year  (Sponsored by Optum) Winner: Dave Sheehan, AIB Student of the Year  (Sponsored by Deutsche Bank) Winner: Kevin Brosnan, University of Limerick Team of the Year for Academic Research ( Sponsored by Dun & Bradstreet) Winner: CeADAR Multinational Company of the Year Award  (Sponsored by Accenture Digital) Winner: Pramerica Indigenous Irish Company of the Year  (Sponsored by Pegasus) Winner: Corvil Best Start-up of the Year  (Sponsored by CarTrawler) Winner:  Kinesis Health Technologies   Closing the ceremony was Laura Kennedy, Head of Data Science Recruitment at Next Generation. Laura stated  “Until recently the value of data has not been recognised. However, businesses big and small are now moving into a digital age by harvesting this data and incorporating it into their decision making throughout their business. The DatSci Awards, we believe, will be one of  the building blocks for Ireland to become the European Data Science Hub”.   And to close there was a big reachout thanking the sponsors for their support including Title Sponsor Optum, Silver Sponsors  Accenture Digital, Deutsche Bank, Dun & Bradstreet, Cartrawler, Pegasus, Associate Sponsors Enterprise Ireland, Zalando and the IDA. All the ticket sales went to a scholarship fund to give a deserving Data Scientist the chance of a  Masters programme in Data Science/Business Analytics commencing during the academic year of 2017/2018.     Until next year… bring on  #DatSciAwards  2017  pic.twitter.com/xvjjytVSjT — DatSci Awards (@DatSciAwards)  September 22, 2016     With an intimate and engaging atmosphere it felt like this event will only go from strength to strength next year, although we will be taking a few days off before planning DatSci Awards 2017. For more information on the DatSci Awards  please visit  www.datsciawards.ie  or follow us on twitter  @DatSciAwards