The inaugural DatSci Awards 2016 in association with  CeADAR  and  Next Generation , will be taking place in  Thursday September, 22nd Aviva Stadium. We need your entries by June 30th! Enter  here  asap   “Data science has become one of the most desirable fields to work in across business, research and government. Skills in data science are at a premium and there are amazing career opportunities in the area. This is an opportunity to showcase your work in the area and to be celebrated amongst the best examples of data science in Ireland.” Cronan McNamara Founder & CEO @cremeglobal There are 6 categories and we’d love to see you  entries  in as many categories as you qualify for. Linda Davis, CEO of NextGeneration and member of the judging panel explains why data science is so important.   “Access to data at our fingertips is empowering our worlds day to day, as we learn more about our behaviour and how we are likely to behave in the future. This will impact every element of our lives from medical to how we eat to how we shop. Data is carving the commercial future of our world.” Data Science is really important in so many areas of our lives these days, both in work, home life and our entertainment. Even better many of the leaders and companies are based in Ireland. This is not something that is as well-known as it should be. The goal of these awards is to raise awareness about the many great Irish data success stories and to celebrate these achievements. The shortlists will be at the end of August and the winners will be announced at our awards event at the Aviva in September. Edward McDonnell, Director of the CeADAR Centre for Applied Data Analytics, and member of the judging panel explains the massive opportunity for businesses and individuals. “Business, industry and individuals collect huge amounts of data whether its financial transactions, use of websites, health records, mobile phone records, fitness logs etc, – it’s like finding diamonds in a mine!”   Our  judges   will be ensuring every application is carefully considered. An extensive panel of additional judges will be announced soon. Make sure you get your application in before June 30th  to be considered for one of the six prizes and be part of this great showcase of the Irish Data Science community. In the words of our CEO, Linda Davis, entering and perhaps winning this award could really help you. “Data Science is a real emerging job family and one that is only set to grow in the coming years, becoming a key influencer in the market from an early stage will really enable your career to gain momentum and put you on the map as a person to watch in the future.”