DatSci heatmap generated by  Crazyegg Are you using innovative data insights for your company’s data? If you are not using data to inform your marketing decisions and campaigns then according to  McKinsey  you could be at least 5 to 10% worse off than those companies that use big data insights to plan their marketing strategies.   Are you using heatmaps to understand how people interact with your websites? There are powerful and extremely useful tools to track and monitor how people are (and are not) using your website. These tools are widely available and offer you the ability to make decisions based on data-driven insights rather than just hunches. By learning how people are actually using your website will help to identify where users are experiencing problems or not using the site as intended. These data-driven insights will identify problem points, confusing messages, and other often unexpected insights derived from customer experiences rather than internal hunches. Do you review your Google analytics? You may not use Google for all of your company activities, but chances are your website will have access to Google Analytics or similar alternative. This is a great opportunity to dive deeper into the data behind your customers and potential customers who visit your website and online offerings. Analytics will tell you the gender, age, region, device, time of day and much more about the demographics of those people using your website. It is vitally important to know who your market is, and your website’s analytics is an incredibly powerful way to learn more about this.   There are also a number of useful  courses  (which don’t require a large time commitment) that can help you to master the basics. This will help you to understand what insights you could, and should, be extracting from your website’s data analytics. It is far more useful to have some awareness of this rather that merely paying an expensive 3rd party to manage your SEO (search engine optimisation) strategies.     Use the analytics available from all of your company’s social media accounts not just the company website As with your website’s analytics, there are valuable data insights that should be used from the company’s other social media accounts, including YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram etc. With each of these platforms there are varying levels of data available. They can clearly demonstrate where your message is effectively reaching, and where it may not be, as well as the age, location and gender of your audience.   Use tools like Google trends    Google Trends  is a great tool to use to see what people are searching for both historically and currently in real time. This provides you with invaluable data that you can use to ensure you are targeting your audience’s interests. Use data monitoring to manage the bad news too Sentiment analysis enables you to ensure any damage limitation is handled quicker. Good PR campaign managers are able to deal with negative news as well as positive stories. If you are monitoring social media accounts you will be aware much quicker if there are problems or negative stories emerging about your company brand or product. Exciting times for data driven marketing and data science in general At the upcoming  DatSci Awards  on September 22nd there will be many exciting examples of data led business insights, using sentiment analysis to create exciting data driven techniques. Come along to the DatSci Awards and meet some of the best businesses and individuals working in Irish data science sector at the Aviva Stadium. Tickets are selling out fast, so book your ticket now to ensure you don’t miss out on this celebration of Data and Data Science talent in Ireland.