For over 175 years, Dun & Bradstreet has been passionate about what the power of data to help grow companies. Today, we have over 250 million records in the world’s largest business database, powered by 30,000 data sources updated 5 million times per day. However, for modern business leaders looking to make inspired decisions, data alone is not enough.  Creating growth is dependent on how you use insights and information to deepen and recognize the opportunities hidden in your relationships with your customers, prospects, suppliers and partners. At Dun & Bradstreet, we illuminate the path to growth with unique, global analytics capabilities. By identifying the most valuable relationships within your data, we help our customers model behaviors and predict smarter outcomes that lead to better results. When businesses around the world want to understand their most important relationships, they turn to Dun & Bradstreet as a trusted source – and they have for almost two centuries. It is this rich heritage of growing relationships through data that has motivated Dun & Bradstreet to support the DatSci Awards in 2016. We have had a presence in Ireland since 1967, when our sales function first opened its doors. In May 2010, we expanded our Irish operation by creating a centre of excellence for Technology and Data Operations. Since then, our Dublin team has helped to accelerate our growth strategy by taking the very best of what made our company great over many years and combining it with a new approach fit for the future. With an established base of multinational organisations and a rich pool of highly educated, multilingual talent to draw from, Ireland provides a favourable business environment to support the development of the next generation of Dun & Bradstreet global solutions. The increasing focus in Ireland’s higher-level academic institutions on STEM, Data Science and Analytics is ensuring that we are producing a pool of talent ready to meet the challenges and opportunities of a data-driven economy. As indigenous and multinational companies turn to data and insight as a competitive advantage to drive growth, the demand for individuals who can bring technology together with unstructured data to tell a compelling story that drives real results is only going to increase. Ireland’s vibrant business sector is recognised internationally as a hub for innovation, research and development. The co-location of many of the world’s leading companies in technology, finance, consulting and analytics, in addition to exciting indigenous start-ups, creates an environment in which cutting edge techniques are nurtured to create the next generation of data-inspired solutions. Ireland is leading the way in helping businesses evolve to a data-driven model for making decisions, and this sector will only continue to grow as the power of data science to create value is fully realised. This new economy based on data-driven insights requires individuals and businesses to be both scientists and storytellers, and we are delighted to support the DatSci Awards in celebrating those who are at the leading edge of this emerging discipline. About Dun & Bradstreet Dun & Bradstreet (NYSE: DNB) grows the most valuable relationships in business. By uncovering truth and meaning from data, we connect our customers with the prospects, suppliers, clients and partners that matter most, and have since 1841. Nearly ninety percent of the Fortune 500, and companies of every size around the world, rely on our data, insights and analytics. For more about Dun & Bradstreet, visit  DNB.com . Twitter:  @DnBUS