With just over 2 weeks to go until the DatSci Awards, judge’s deliberations are well under way. Last Monday the judges got even closer to choosing their winners for the 6 categories  as the finalists for Best Academic Research, Indigenous Irish, Multi National, Start Up, Student and Data Scientist of the Year presented their submissions in hopes of moving closer to the winning title. Presentations took place in the Aviva Stadium, the chosen venue for the DatSci Awards on the 22nd of September. The day was a buzz with excitement, and graced with some of the top data science innovators in Ireland. It was also an incredible opportunity to share excitement about the upcoming DatSci Awards, and see all of the finalists ahead of the inaugural event.   
 DatSci Awards in Association with CeADAR and Next Generation As we are edging closer to the day, ticket sales are continuing to be a success with many already sold. In an effort to pay if forward to the next generation of data scientists ALL proceeds of ticket sales will be placed in a Scholarship Fund for a deserving student for a Level 9 MSc in Data Science/Business Analytics for the Academic Year 2017-2018! For those of you that have not already booked your ticket, please contact Roisin, at info@datsciawards.ie,  to secure your seat at the Celebratory Afternoon. Tickets will be €140 per person  which will be allocated on a first-come, first-served basis, the Awards Afternoon will be taking place in the Aviva Stadium, Dublin September 22nd 2016 from 1pm -6pm. With your ticket you will be treated to a Drinks reception on arrival, entertainment throughout and a wonderful meal while you have the chance to network with leaders of the Data Science industry. Make sure to contact Roisin on the DatSci Team via email – info@DatSciAwards.ie  or via Eventbrite to secure your ticket today. We look forward to meeting you there, and enjoying a celebration of Data Science, and toasting to our finalists and ultimate winners on the night .